Evaluations of parental capacity are most commonly requested by case workers from the Division of Children and Family Services (DCFS) or the Washington State Attorney General’s office. Such evaluations provide opinions to the court to assist in decision making around a person’s parental capacity and the best psychological interests of their child. Parents referred for such evaluations have often been alleged to have abused, abandoned or neglected their children or to have mental health and/or substance use issues which may have impaired their parental capacity.

Parenting capacity evaluations follow RCW 13.34, Juvenile Court Act – Dependency and Termination of Parent-Child Relationship, specifically 13.34.180 subsection 1 and 13.34. 190 subsection 1b. Such evaluations provide estimates of the likelihood for conditions to be remedied so that the child can be returned to the parent and the parent’s ability to address parental deficiencies within the near future. Treatment recommendations or other “necessary services” to facilitate return of the examinee’s child are usually provided. The parent’s ability to benefit from such services is also estimated. Finally, if appropriate, opinions regarding the child’s best psychological interests are provided to assist the court.

Frequently, Dr. Freedman is asked to provide second opinion parental capacity evaluations. Such evaluations may be helpful to provide information to the court when conditions have changed or the initial evaluation provided insufficient or inaccurate information.

Parental capacity evaluations usually begin with an interview using a semi-structured format to collect information from the parent regarding their own history and their orientation to parenting. Dr. Freedman also uses a semi-structured interview to collect information about the parent’s current mental health function. Frequently Dr. Freedman will administer empirically validated parent related tests and will observe the parent and child together. Home visits are sometimes included as well. When there are questions regarding the effect of emotional or intellectual function on parenting capacity, empirically derived tests of function in these areas may be administered.

When conducting parental capacity evaluations Dr. Freedman reviews multiple forms of written documentation including pleadings and court orders, declarations or other written documentation from the parties or their advocates, written input from collateral sources, criminal or law enforcement history, school records, mental or physical health records, previous psychological or substance abuse evaluations and child protective service records among others. Dr. Freedman conducts interviews with collateral sources who know or have worked with the parent and the child, including family members, mental health providers, physicians, teachers, athletic coaches and religious leaders among others.

For further information on the ethics and practice of parental capacity evlauations please review the [Guidelines for Psychological Evaluations in Child Protection Matters](http://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/child-protection.pdf) provided by the American Psychological Association.
